rfcs: gpu: add Level Zero runtime (#4275)
oneapi-src/oneDNN: rfcs/20251103-level-zero-runtime/README.md

For oneDNN, Level Zero would provide quicker access to the newest features available for Intel® accelerators, including: reusable and mutable command lists, support for multi-device contexts, shared memory between accelerators, as well as lowered execution latency.

Using a modified [oneDNN example](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/blob/main/examples/cnn_inference_f32.cpp) and [POC implementation](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/tree/spalicki/l0_backend), the Level Zero runtime shows better performance than OpenCL™ and SYCL:

|           | Level Zero | OpenCL™ | SYCL with Level Zero | SYCL with OpenCL™ |
| --------- | ---------- | ------- | -------------------- | ----------------- |
| Min (ms): |        557 |     640 |                  599 |               658 |
| Avg (ms): |        579 |     668 |                  621 |               689 |

## Proposal

### Build option

> 

Reviewer: Would it be possible to add build option for user to specify directory with L0 headers? There is such option for OpenCL `-DOpenCL_INCLUDE_DIR`.

> Adding Level Zero runtime does not require new build options and only requires a new runtime `L0` in the existing CMake build option `ONEDNN_GPU_RUNTIME`, and it and assumes that: `ONEDNN_GPU_VENDOR=INTEL`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adding Level Zero runtime does not require new build options and only requires a new runtime `L0` in the existing CMake build option `ONEDNN_GPU_RUNTIME`, that is only compatible with `ONEDNN_GPU_VENDOR=INTEL` (default).
```

Author: Changed.

### API/ABI change

> Adding Level Zero as a new oneDNN runtime is fairly invisible to the end user and requires no API/ABI modification.

Reviewer 2: I guess this contradict the part about interop API, where new APIs are needed for interop purposes. Maybe merge this section with interop section?

### Integration with SYCL runtime

Currently, the Level Zero loader is used when oneDNN is compiled with SYCL runtime and is using the Level Zero backend (similarly to OpenCL™ runtime when using the OpenCL™ backend), since not all required features are available directly in the SYCL API. The common code of SYCL with Level Zero and native Level Zero would be extracted as part of the new Level Zero runtime (to avoid redundancies) in the same way common OpenCL™ code is part of the OpenCL™ runtime.

### Integration with OpenCL™ runtime
To use OpenCL™ C kernels, there are several common functions that need to be extracted from oneDNN OpenCL™ runtime code and moved to `src/gpu/intel/compute/utils.hpp`:
```cpp
// Defined in src/gpu/intel/ocl/engine.hpp implemented in src/gpu/intel/ocl/engine.cpp
status_t preprocess_headers(stringstream_t &pp_code, const char *code, const compute::kernel_ctx_t &kernel_ctx);

// Defined and implemented in src/gpu/intel/ocl/utils.cpp
void debugdump_processed_source(const std::string &source, const std::string &options, const std::string &cl_options);
```

> ### Interop API

Reviewer 2: Do we also need to expose `cache_blob` related functionalities for engine serialization?

dnnl_status_t DNNL_API dnnl_l0_interop_memory_create(dnnl_memory_t *memory, const_dnnl_memory_desc_t memory_desc, dnnl_engine_t engine, void *handle);

/// Creates a memory object with multiple handles.
///
/// @param memory Output memory object.
/// @param memory_desc Memory descriptor.
/// @param engine Engine to use.
/// @param memory_kind Memory allocation kind to specify the type of handles.
/// @param nhandles Number of handles.
/// @param handles Handles of the memory buffers to use as underlying storages.
///     For each element of the @p handles array the following applies:
///     - A pointer to the user-allocated buffer. In this case the library doesn't own the buffer. Requires @p memory_kind to be equal to dnnl::l0_interop::memory_kind::usm.
///     - The DNNL_MEMORY_ALLOCATE special value. Instructs the library to allocate the buffer for the memory object. In this case the library owns the buffer.
///     - The DNNL_MEMORY_NONE specific value. Instructs the library to create memory object without an underlying buffer.
/// @returns #dnnl_success on success and a status describing the error otherwise.

> dnnl_status_t DNNL_API dnnl_l0_interop_memory_create_v2(dnnl_memory_t *memory, const_dnnl_memory_desc_t memory_desc, dnnl_engine_t engine, size_t nhandles, void **handles);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
dnnl_status_t DNNL_API dnnl_l0_interop_memory_create(dnnl_memory_t *memory, const_dnnl_memory_desc_t memory_desc, dnnl_engine_t engine, int nhandles, void **handles);
```

```

#### Getter and Setter for Level Zero memory object
```cpp
/// Returns an Level Zero memory object associated with a memory object.
///
/// @param memory Memory object.
/// @param mem_object Output Level Zero memory object.
/// @returns #dnnl_success on success and a status describing the error otherwise.
dnnl_status_t DNNL_API dnnl_l0_interop_memory_get_mem_object(const_dnnl_memory_t memory, void **mem_object);

/// Sets Level Zero memory object associated with a memory object.
///
/// For behavioral details, see dnnl_memory_set_data_handle().
///
/// @param memory Memory object.
/// @param mem_object Level Zero memory object.
/// @returns #dnnl_success on success and a status describing the error otherwise.
dnnl_status_t DNNL_API dnnl_l0_interop_memory_set_mem_object(dnnl_memory_t memory, void *mem_object);
```

> #### Primitive exection

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Primitive execution
```

For oneDNN, Level Zero would provide quicker access to the newest features available for Intel® accelerators, including: reusable and mutable command lists, support for multi-device contexts, shared memory between accelerators, as well as lowered execution latency.

Using a modified [oneDNN example](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/blob/main/examples/cnn_inference_f32.cpp) and [POC implementation](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/tree/spalicki/l0_backend), the Level Zero runtime shows better performance than OpenCL™ and SYCL:

|           | Level Zero | OpenCL™ | SYCL with Level Zero | SYCL with OpenCL™ |
| --------- | ---------- | ------- | -------------------- | ----------------- |
| Min (ms): |        557 |     640 |                  599 |               658 |
| Avg (ms): |        579 |     668 |                  621 |               689 |

## Proposal

### Build option

> Adding Level Zero runtime does not require new build options and only requires a new runtime `L0` in the existing CMake build option `ONEDNN_GPU_RUNTIME`, that is only compatible with `ONEDNN_GPU_VENDOR=INTEL` (default).

Author: No, I do not remember where the `L0` came from but originally it was meant to be `LZ`.

### External API/ABI change

Adding Level Zero as a new oneDNN runtime is fairly invisible to the end user with the exception of new Level Zero interop API no existing API/ABI requires modification. 

### Interop API

#### Engine creation
```cpp
/// Creates an engine associated with a Level Zero device and a Level Zero context.
///
/// @param engine Output engine.
/// @param driver Pointer to the Level Zero driver to use for the engine.
/// @param device Pointer to the Level Zero device to use for the engine.
/// @param context Pointer to the Level Zero context to use for the engine.
/// @returns #dnnl_success on success and a status describing the error otherwise.

> dnnl_status_t DNNL_API dnnl_l0_interop_engine_create(dnnl_engine_t *engine, const ze_driver_handle_t adriver, const ze_device_handle_t adevice, const ze_context_handle_t acontext);

Reviewer 3: I'd suggest to consider `dnnl_levelzero_interop_engine_create` over `l0` in the naming part as digits in public APIs are rather uncommon.

```
#### Getters for context, device and driver used by the engine
```cpp
/// Returns the Level Zero context associated with an engine.
///
/// @param engine Engine to query.
/// @param context Pointer to the underlying Level Zero context of the engine.
/// @returns #dnnl_success on success and a status describing the error otherwise.

> dnnl_status_t DNNL_API dnnl_l0_interop_engine_get_context(dnnl_engine_t engine, ze_context_handle_t context);

Reviewer 3: Same applies to other getters.
```suggestion
dnnl_status_t DNNL_API dnnl_l0_interop_engine_get_context(dnnl_engine_t engine, ze_context_handle_t *context);
```
